docs: added guidelines to backplane permissions updates (#1587)
openshift/managed-cluster-config: docs/backplane/guideline.md

# Goals

> 
> Answer the following questions:
> * How can LPSRE team members proactively address backplane permissions concerns to facilitate the review process?
> * What conventions should be followed to make the intention behind changes more obvious?
> * Review comments are inconsistent (though not necessarily conflicting) between reviewers of backplane permissions changes. How can that be improved?
> * How can we reconcile SRE-P expectations with LPSRE expectations for what constitutes reasonable permissions?

Reviewer: ```suggestion

This document defines the backplane access guidelines. Teams that require access to backplane, or that require change to their current access, must create or modify a document "Service Access Requirements", and this guidelines document will serve as a reference that clarifies what permissions can be requested and under which circumstances.

It covers all the different aspects that need to be taken into account by teams submitting Service Access Requirements, such as Training, Access Scope, different Personas that play a role in backplane access, and a catalog of permissions that can be requested.
```

# Requirements

Backplane governs Red Hat access to both the Managed OpenShift cluster and the cloud account on which the cluster is hosted.  Permissions for each product are documented in the respective service definitions here:
* https://docs.openshift.com/dedicated/osd_architecture/osd_policy/policy-process-security.html#privileged-access_policy-process-security 
* https://docs.openshift.com/rosa/rosa_architecture/rosa_policy_service_definition/rosa-policy-process-security.html#rosa-policy-rh-access_rosa-policy-process-security

> For the purposes of this document we are focusing on the in-cluster access, not the cloud account access. Since these are currently the same for OSD and ROSA (May 15, 2023) we can focus on a single set of requirements.  The following is the a summary taken from the ROSA documents and specifies only read or write operations that are something other than `None`:

Reviewer: @jewzaam are we OK with not documenting the cloud account access for now?

Also, I don't like the fact that this is expressed as a snapshot rather than an accepted pattern.

Author: FWIW cloud access is not managed through MCC. It's configured in `app-interface` so even if we discuss it here we should redirect to the authoritative document which should be located near the backplane config in `app-interface itself.

Author: I believe this is what Naveen means by requirements doc https://github.com/openshift/managed-cluster-config/pull/1678/files#diff-a68aaa6a55aef8a6f631e8ecdd46c50af8bceffd8e6cec11c0c571d8e95e3540

Reviewer 2: Cloud access needs to be documented.  I did include this for the draft SREP requirements.  This should change.

```suggestion
For the purposes of this document we are focusing on all backplane access to a cluster, including in-cluster RBAC and cloud account access.  The following is the a summary taken from the ROSA documents and specifies only read or write operations that are something other than `None`:
```

And the bullet points following updated.

* OpenShift SRE have Read permission in all core and layered product namespaces.
* OpenShift SRE have "Very limited" Write permission in core namespaces.
* CEE has Read permission in all core and layered product namespaces.

> And that is it.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> As this is written from the customer perspective and focuses on a single SRE personal there are some nuances to tease out when considering different types of support and SRE teams within Red Hat.  This document captures these nuances as guidelines.

Reviewer: This paragraph is incomplete and probably not suitable for this document.

# Guidelines

> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

The following guidelines must be followed when submitting PR's that affect [backplane resources](../../deploy/backplane/).
Where possible these guidelines are enforced by CI and can be tested locally by running `make enforce-backplane-rules`.

> In general all permissions must follow the principle of least privilege.  Meaning you only get the bare minimum permissions required to do the job, nothing more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All permissions must follow the principle of least privilege.  Meaning you only get the bare minimum permissions required to do the job, nothing more.
```

Reviewer: Can we call them out explicitely?

## Training

> This guideline assumes all personas with access to production customer clusters have been through all necessary vetting (background checks) and training before access is granted.

Reviewer: Can we get a link to this process?

## Access Scope

> A persona must have access only to systems on which support can actively be provided by that persona.  This means if a presona is dependent on some software being installed, a layered product / addon / managed service, then the persona is not permitted access to the system until that installation is triggered.  Note this means access is not dependent on successfully deploying that software!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A persona must have access only to systems on which support can actively be provided by that persona.  This means if a presona is dependent on some software being installed, a layered product / addon / managed service, then the persona is not permitted access to the system until that installation is triggered.  Note this means access is not dependent on successfully deploying that software.
```

## Personas

> * Managed Cloud Service (MCS)
>    * formerly Customer Experience and Engagement (CEE)
> * Site Reliability Engineer (SRE)
>    * https://landing.google.com/sre/ 
> * Platform SRE (SREP)
>    * SRE in SD primarily responsible for Managed OpenShift Platform
>    * https://source.redhat.com/groups/public/sre 
> * Layered Product SRE (LPSRE)
>    * SRE in SD primarily responsible for Managed Services / Layered Products
>    * formerly MT-SRE and CS-SRE
>    * https://source.redhat.com/groups/public/sre-services/sre_services_wiki/managed_tenants_sre_introduction
>    * https://source.redhat.com/groups/public/sre-services/sre_services_wiki/cssre_introduction 
> * Application SRE (AppSRE)
>    * SRE in SD primarily responsible for Red Hat internal applications and capabilities provided to other Red Hat personas and Red Hat customers
>    * https://source.redhat.com/groups/public/sre-services/sre_services_wiki/app_sre_introduction_new 
> * Hybrid SRE
>    * Engineering teams are SRE for their products in conjunction with other SD SRE teams.
>    * https://source.redhat.com/groups/public/sdsea/hybridsre 
>    * Teams that are the initial focus include HyperShift, ACS, and ODS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Persona                     | Description                                                                                                                                                                  |
| --------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| OpenShift SRE (SREP)        | SRE team in SD primarily responsible for Managed OpenShift Platform. https://source.redhat.com/groups/public/sre                                                             |
| Managed Cloud Service (MCS) | Customer Experience and Engagement (CEE)                                                                                                                                     |
| Layered Product SRE (LPSRE) | SRE in SD primarily responsible for Managed Services / Layered Products.                                                                                                     |
| Application SRE (AppSRE)    | SRE in SD primarily responsible for Red Hat internal applications and capabilities provided to other Red Hat personas and Red Hat customers                                  |
| Hybrid SRE                  | Engineering teams are SRE for their products in conjunction with other SD SRE teams such as Hypershift, ACS and ODS. https://source.redhat.com/groups/public/sdsea/hybridsre |
```

Reviewer: Note that I have removed the generic SRE line.

## Privilege Escalation

Some personas may elevate permissions beyond the day-to-day permisisons.  All such elevations are audited and require justification and approval from managers after use and must never be used lightly.

Personas permitted to use privilege escalation on customer clusters are:
* SREP
* LPSRE

> Escalation of privileges uses a specific user to eleavte permissios to `cluster-admin`.  More information on [ops-sop/v4/howto/backplane-elevate-privileges.md](https://github.com/openshift/ops-sop/blob/master/v4/howto/backplane-elevate-privileges.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Escalation of privileges uses a specific user to elevate permissios to `cluster-admin`.  More information on [ops-sop/v4/howto/backplane-elevate-privileges.md](https://github.com/openshift/ops-sop/blob/master/v4/howto/backplane-elevate-privileges.md).
```

## Day-to-Day

Permissions for day-to-day operations should not require any special permission to utilize.  These permissions follow these guidelines:

> * No secret access except where the secret is known to contain no actual secret data.

Reviewer: "actual secret data" needs to be qualified. Are we talking PII?

Author: I think it's more likely we are talking about connection strings, credentials, certificates, etc...
Things which when known would allow a user to access systems they do not normally have access to or with permissions they would not normally have.
Though to Jaime's point this is unclear and if the data truly isn't secret we should find a way to observe it without accessing the `Secret` resource directly.

> * No customer namespace access as the baseline.  Customer namespace access must be justified based on specific service support needs.

Reviewer: Is this available today without privilege escalation?

Author: Access to customer namespaces requires impersonating `cluster-admin` today.

Reviewer: I propose we have a separete section detailing when you can use the privilege escalation process and include customer namespaces in there.

Author: The [SOP](https://github.com/openshift/ops-sop/blob/master/v4/howto/backplane-elevate-privileges.md#trust-and-verify) generally describes the conditions under which you can impersonate and what the consequences are. I think the term _customer_ namespace is actually the issue here. We should be saying _unprotected_ namespace i.e. namespaces not prefixed with `redhat-`, `openshift-`, or `kube-`. Namespaces which are not protected by MCVW pose a risk in the form of cross-contamination with customer data and could require SRE's to operate alongside the customers. RHODS is an example of this with the `rhods-notebooks` namespace.

True customer namespaces which are unrelated to managed services should never be touched by SRE and when accessed via impersonation should trigger an unjustifiable audit event.

> * No write access by default, all write permissions require justification.

Reviewer: Is this available today without privilege escalation?

Reviewer: Can those be documented and put in a separate section in this doc?

Author: These vary per team and would be in the respective requirements docs e.g. https://github.com/openshift/managed-cluster-config/pull/1678/files#diff-c10cf58adb4851f45f91770c92da8e2524d881851326877849f503f00f4acd5cR23-R25.

> * Read access to cluster scope resources may be granted if those resources do not contain any sensitive customer data.

Reviewer: Same as above. Can we define sensitive customer data a bit more concretely? Also, we should be consistent with the wording. A few bullets above it says "actual secret data".

* Read access to namespace scoped resources is never granted at a cluster scope.

>    * Exception may be granted for Red Hat managed systems only, where Red Hat is the customer, and such access is justified for day-to-day operations.

Reviewer: What if those namespace scoped resources include sensitive customer data?

Author: I think the nuance is in the term "justified". Whoever determines what is justified for day-to-day operations must identify if unwanted access to customer data would be possible. It might make sense to add a section for MCC approvers with a list of questions to ask when teams require exceptions to the default requirements.

* Existing ClusterRoles are preferred when granting permissions in a namespace.
   * `view` - general read-only access to core Kubernetes and OpenShift resources, except for Secrets
   * `admin` - full administrative access to the namespace.

>    * `dedicated-readers` - created by OSD/ROSA and dynamically aggregates view permissions for resources installed by OLM.

Reviewer: Why is `admin` an option here? Who would leverage this and how?

Author: We do for LPSRE (see [example](https://github.com/openshift/managed-cluster-config/blob/master/deploy/backplane/lpsre/20-lpsre-addon-operator.SubjectPermission.yml#L11-L12)). This is for legacy purposes and should eventually be removed once support requirements are well-defined.

| SubjectPermissions | SubjectPermissions must only permit ClusterRoles with `-cluster` suffix in clusterPermissions (cluster scope). | Roles: `admin`, `dedicated-readers`, `view`, `system:openshift:cloud-credential-operator:cluster-reader` | :heavy_check_mark: |
| SubjectPermissions | SubjectPermissions must only permit ClusterRoles with `-project` suffix in permissions (namespace scope). | Roles: `admin`, `dedicated-readers`, `view`, `system:openshift:cloud-credential-operator:cluster-reader` | :heavy_check_mark: |
| SubjectPermissions | SubjectPermissions allowed namespace regex must constrain bindings to only the subset of namespaces access is required in. | N/A | :x: |
| SubjectPermissions | SubjectPermissions must deny the `openshift-backplane-cluster-admin` namespace. | N/A | :heavy_check_mark: |
| config.yaml        | RBAC for Layered Products teams is only provisioned on clusters where the respective Layered Products are installed. | N/A | :x: |

## Allowed Secret Access

The following secrets are allowed to be accessed for the given reasons.  Note to be in this list the `Secret` must not contain any secret data (see [Definitions](#definitions)).

> | Namespace | Secret | Reason |

Reviewer: nit: perhaps adding a "Who" or "Persona" column would be useful to set expectations and boundaries.

Author: Done, PTAL.

* platform namespace - any Namespace `name` that matches the following regular expression: `(^kube$|^kube-.*|^openshift$|^openshift-.*|^default$|^redhat-.*)`
* customer namespace - any Namespace that is _not_ a *platform namespace*

## Access Scope

A persona must have access only to systems on which support can actively be provided by that persona.  This means if a persona is dependent on some software being installed, a layered product / addon / managed service, then the persona is not permitted access to the system until that installation is triggered.  Note this means access is not dependent on successfully deploying that software.

## Personas

| Persona | Description |
| ------- | ----------- |
| Managed Cloud Service (MCS) | Customer facing support engineers (formerly Customer Experience and Engagement (CEE)) |
| Platform SRE (SREP) | SRE in SD primarily responsible for Managed OpenShift Platform |
| Layered Products SRE (LPSRE) | SRE in SD primarily responsible for Layered Products (formerly MT-SRE and CS-SRE) |
| Application SRE (AppSRE) | SRE in SD primarily responsible for Red Hat internal and external SaaS offerings |

> | Hybrid SRE | Engineering teams are SRE for their products in conjunction with other SD SRE teams. Teams that are the initial focus include HyperShift, ACS, and ODS. |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| Hybrid SRE | Engineering teams are SRE for their products in conjunction with other SD SRE teams. |
```

> | Persona | Description | References |
> | ------- | ----------- | ---------- |
> | Managed Cloud Service (MCS) | Customer facing support engineers (formerly Customer Experience and Engagement (CEE)) | |
> | Platform SRE (SREP) | SRE in SD primarily responsible for Managed OpenShift Platform | [source page](https://source.redhat.com/groups/public/sre) |
> | Layered Products SRE (LPSRE) | SRE in SD primarily responsible for Layered Products (formerly MT-SRE and CS-SRE) | [mt-sre source page](https://source.redhat.com/groups/public/sre-services/sre_services_wiki/managed_tenants_sre_introduction), [cs-sre source page](https://source.redhat.com/groups/public/sre-services/sre_services_wiki/cssre_introduction) |
> | Application SRE (AppSRE) | SRE in SD primarily responsible for Red Hat internal and external SaaS offerings | [source page](https://source.redhat.com/groups/public/sre-services/sre_services_wiki/app_sre_introduction_new) |
> | Hybrid SRE | Engineering teams are SRE for their products in conjunction with other SD SRE teams. Teams that are the initial focus include HyperShift, ACS, and ODS. | [source page](https://source.redhat.com/groups/public/sdsea/hybridsre) |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Persona | Description |
| ------- | ----------- |
| Managed Cloud Service (MCS) | Customer facing support engineers (formerly Customer Experience and Engagement (CEE)) |
| Platform SRE (SREP) | SRE in SD primarily responsible for Managed OpenShift Platform |
| Layered Products SRE (LPSRE) | SRE in SD primarily responsible for Layered Products (formerly MT-SRE and CS-SRE) |
| Application SRE (AppSRE) | SRE in SD primarily responsible for Red Hat internal and external SaaS offerings |
| Hybrid SRE | Engineering teams are SRE for their products in conjunction with other SD SRE teams. Teams that are the initial focus include HyperShift, ACS, and ODS. |
```

> | Hybrid SRE | Engineering teams are SRE for their products in conjunction with other SD SRE teamsl. Teams that are the initial focus include HyperShift, ACS, and ODS. | [source page](https://source.redhat.com/groups/public/sdsea/hybridsre) |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Hybrid SRE | Engineering teams are SRE for their products in conjunction with other SD SRE teams. Teams that are the initial focus include HyperShift, ACS, and ODS. | [source page](https://source.redhat.com/groups/public/sdsea/hybridsre) |
```
```suggestion
| Hybrid SRE | Engineering teams are SRE for their products in conjunction with other SD SRE teamsl. Teams that are the initial focus include HyperShift, ACS, and ODS. | [source page](https://source.redhat.com/groups/public/sdsea/hybridsre) |
```
```suggestion
| Hybrid SRE | Engineering teams are SRE for their products in conjunction with other SD SRE teamsl. Teams that are the initial focus include HyperShift, ACS, and ODS. | [source page](https://source.redhat.com/groups/public/sdsea/hybridsre) |
```

## Day-to-Day

Permissions for day-to-day operations should not require any special permission to utilize.  These permissions follow these guidelines:

* No secret access except where listed in the [Allowed Secret Access](#allowed-secret-access) section of this guideline.
* No customer namespace access as the baseline.  Customer namespace access must be justified based on specific service support needs.
* No write access by default, all write permissions require justification.
* Read access to cluster scope resources may be granted if those resources cannot contain secret data (see [Definitions](#definitions)).
* Read access to namespace scoped resources is never granted at a cluster scope.
  * Exception may be granted for Red Hat managed systems only, where Red Hat is the customer, and such access is justified for day-to-day operations.
* Existing ClusterRoles are preferred when granting permissions in a namespace.
  * `view` - general read-only access to core Kubernetes and OpenShift resources, except for Secrets

>   * `admin` - full administrative access to the namespace.

Reviewer 3: We should note that this includes secrets

>   * `dedicated-readers` - created by OSD/ROSA and dynamically aggregates view permissions for resources installed by OLM.

Reviewer 3: We could note here that it also includes permissions in `view`

| SubjectPermissions | SubjectPermissions must only permit ClusterRoles with `-project` suffix in permissions (namespace scope). | Roles: `admin`, `dedicated-readers`, `view`, `system:openshift:cloud-credential-operator:cluster-reader` | :heavy_check_mark: |
| SubjectPermissions | SubjectPermissions allowed namespace regex must constrain bindings to only the subset of namespaces access is required in. | N/A | :x: |
| SubjectPermissions | SubjectPermissions must deny the `openshift-backplane-cluster-admin` namespace. | N/A | :heavy_check_mark: |
| config.yaml        | RBAC for Layered Products teams is only provisioned on clusters where the respective Layered Products are installed. | N/A | :x: |

## Allowed Secret Access

The following secrets may be accessed by the respective persona for the given reasons.
Note to be in this list the `Secret` must not contain any secret data (see [Definitions](#definitions)).

| Persona | Namespace | Secret | Reason |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |

> SREP | openshift-monitoring | alertmanager-main | Platform SRE have access to the PagerDuty API and DMS Webhook from other systems. The ability to review the configuration of alertmanager is important for SRE to understand how monitoring has been configured and if there are issues with the routing of alerts. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| SREP | openshift-monitoring | alertmanager-main | Platform SRE have access to the PagerDuty API and DMS Webhook from other systems. The ability to review the configuration of alertmanager is important for SRE to understand how monitoring has been configured and if there are issues with the routing of alerts. |
```
